[Release-2201.5.0] Add regexp type under advance general purpose language features section (#6550)
ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website: swan-lake/learn-the-language/language-basics.md

 
In this way, the ``is`` operator in a condition causes the declared type to be narrowed.

## RegExp Type

Ballerina provides first-class support for regular expressions, which are represented by the ``RegExp`` built-in type defined in the ``lang.regexp`` module.

> You can declare regular expressions in two ways.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two ways to declare regular expressions:
```

> Using regular expression template literals.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Using regular expression template literals:
```

```ballerina
string:RegExp reg = re `abc+`;
```
In this approach, you can use the ``re`` keyword to define a regular expression pattern using a template literal. This allows for easy expression of regular expressions in a way that is similar to other languages.

> Using the ``fromString`` function from the ``lang.regexp`` module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Using the ``fromString`` function from the ``lang.regexp`` module:
```

```ballerina
import lang.regexp;

string quantiferStr = "{2,3}";
string stringPattern = string `abc${quantiferStr}`;
regexp:RegExp reg = check regexp:fromString(stringPattern);
```

This approach allows for more dynamic construction of regular expressions, using string manipulation techniques to create a pattern that can be compiled into a ``RegExp`` value.

> The template literal results in compilation of the regular expression at compile-time. On the other hand, the ``fromString`` function results in runtime compilation of the regular expression.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The template literal approach results in the compilation of the regular expression at compile-time, while the ``fromString`` function results in runtime compilation.
```

> Ballerina regular expressions are based on the ECMAScript 2022 specification. It's important to note that Ballerina's regular expression support is based on a subset of ECMAScript. You can refer to the [Ballerina regular expression specification](https://ballerina.io/spec/lang/master/#section_10.1) to find the supported syntax.

Reviewer: Reiterating the same thing. Shall we rephrase this
```suggestion
Ballerina regular expressions are based on a subset of ECMAScript 2022 specification. You can refer to the [Ballerina regular expression specification](https://ballerina.io/spec/lang/master/#section_10.1) to find the supported syntax.
```

Regular expression templates support interpolation, which allows you to dynamically insert values into a regular expression pattern. This is achieved by placing the interpolation token ``${...}`` inside a ReAtom, which is a sub-syntax defined by the regular expression grammar.

For example:
```ballerina
function createPattern(string name) {
    string:RegExp pattern = re `[a-z]{3}|${name}`;
}
```
In this example, the regular expression pattern includes the ``name`` parameter interpolated into the pattern. This allows for dynamic patterns that can change based on input.

### Unicode property Escape

Unicode general category templates can be used to match characters based on their Unicode properties. These templates can be used with the ``\p{...}`` or ``\P{...}`` escape sequences in a regular expression. Here ``\P`` represents the negation of a unicode template.

Below are some examples of unicode general category templates and their meanings,

> - ``\p{L}`` matches any letter 

Reviewer: Add a code snippet instead. With an example mention \P is negated \p

- ``\p{Ll}`` matches any lower case letter
- ``\p{N}`` matches any digit
- ``\P{P}`` matches any non-punctuation character

Ballerina regex also supports unicode script properties that can be used to match characters based on the language. Inorder to represent a unicode script we have to add ``sc=`` inside the curly braces.

Here are some property meanings,

- ``\p{sc=Arabic}`` matches any character in arabic.
- ``\p{sc=Latin}`` matches any character in latin.

### Non-capturing groups

> Ballerina regexp supports non-capturing groups and flags to control the behavior of regular expression patterns. These allow you to group a set of regular expression constructs without capturing the matched text.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ballerina regex supports non-capturing groups and flags to control the behavior of regular expression patterns. These allow you to group a set of regular expression constructs without capturing the matched text.

`  //add an example here and remove the syntax`
```

non-capturing groups syntax :=  (?[flags][-][flags]:pattern) 

> Ballerina supports four flags that can be used to modify the behavior of regular expression patterns:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Ballerina supports four flags that can be used to modify the behavior of regular expression patterns:
```
Shall we add these in a tabular format?

> Ballerina supports four flags that can be used to modify the behavior of regular expression patterns:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ballerina supports the below flags that can be used to modify the behavior of regular expression patterns. These flags can be used separately or together in any order, and are included as part of the regular expression:
```

- ``i`` (ignore case) flag: This flag makes the regular expression pattern case-insensitive, so that it matches both uppercase and lowercase letters.
- ``m`` (multiline) flag: This flag changes the behavior of the ``^`` and ``$`` anchors, so that they match the beginning and end of each line (as opposed to the beginning and end of the entire input string).

> - ``s`` (dot all) flag: This flag changes the behavior of the ``.`` character, so that it matches any character including newline characters.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- ``s`` (dot all) flag: This flag changes the behavior of the ``.`` character so that it matches any character including new-line characters.
```

> - ``x`` (comment) flag: This flag allows you to include comments in your regular expression pattern, using the ``#`` character. Comments are ignored by the regular expression engine.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- ``x`` (comment) flag: This flag allows you to include comments in your regular expression pattern using the ``#`` character. Comments are ignored by the regular expression engine.
```

> - ``x`` (comment) flag: This flag allows you to include comments in your regular expression pattern, using the ``#`` character. Comments are ignored by the regular expression engine.

Reviewer: Add a small table with the flag, description, and a small example

```ballerina
// Non-capturing group allows you to apply multiple flags to the pattern inside the parentheses. 
// `i`, `m`, and `s` flags are applied to the pattern inside the group. 
// `i` flag makes the pattern case-insensitive.
// `m` flag makes `^` and `$` match the beginning and end of each line.
// `s` flag makes the . metacharacters match any character, including line terminators. 
// This pattern will macth match "hello\nworld", "hello world", and "HELLO \n WORld"

string:RegExp nonCapturingGrpPattern = re `(?im-s:hello.+world)`;
```

### Using regexp values

> The ``RegExp`` type in supports a set of lang library functions, such as ``split``, ``findAll``, ``findAllGroups``, and ``replaceAll``. Refer [RegExp API Docs](https://lib.ballerina.io/ballerina/lang.regexp/latest) for how to use these functions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``RegExp`` values can be used with the [RegExp](https://lib.ballerina.io/ballerina/lang.regexp/latest) methods (add methods...) and with the [String](https://lib.ballerina.io/ballerina/lang.string/latest) methods [includesMatch](https://lib.ballerina.io/ballerina/lang.string/latest#includesMatch) and [matches](https://lib.ballerina.io/ballerina/lang.string/latest#matches)
```

 
In this way, the ``is`` operator in a condition causes the declared type to be narrowed.

> ## RegExp Type

Author: We are adding BBE's for RegExp. Is there any other place where we can explain there stuff?

> ## RegExp Type

Reviewer 3: I meant like adding this under a different section like https://ballerina.io/learn/distinctive-language-features/advanced-general-purpose-language-features/.

> ## RegExp Type

Reviewer: I get that it's kinda a distinct feature of the language. But since it comes under simple values in the spec, shouldn't it come under the basics guide? wdyt?
@hasithaa appreciate your thoughts

> ## RegExp Type

Reviewer 3: Guides don't follow the same structure as the spec. Even `decimal` is under distinctive language features/data - https://ballerina.io/learn/distinctive-language-features/data/#decimal-type. Object types is under distinctive language features/Advanced, general-purpose language features while classes are in the basics section.

> ## RegExp Type

Author: Added this to advance general purpose language features section

Ballerina provides first-class support for regular expressions, which are represented by the ``RegExp`` built-in type defined in the ``lang.regexp`` module.

You can declare regular expressions in two ways.

> Using regular expression template literal:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Using regular expression template literals:
```

Reviewer 3: Is this way flow of using `:` consistent with the rest of the guide?

```ballerina
string:RegExp reg = re `abc+`;
```
In this approach, you can use the ``re`` keyword to define a regular expression pattern using a template literal. This allows for easy expression of regular expressions in a way that is similar to other languages.

> Using the fromString method in the ``lang.regexp`` module.
> ```ballerina
> import lang.regexp;
> string quantiferStr = "{2,3}";
> string stringPattern = string `abc${quantiferStr}`;
> regexp:RegExp reg = check regexp:fromString(stringPattern);
> ```

Reviewer 3: Shall we add new lines as appropriate?

````suggestion
Using the fromString method in the ``lang.regexp`` module.

```ballerina
import lang.regexp;

string quantiferStr = "{2,3}";
string stringPattern = string `abc${quantiferStr}`;
regexp:RegExp reg = check regexp:fromString(stringPattern);
```

````

This approach allows for more dynamic construction of regular expressions, using string manipulation techniques to create a pattern that can be compiled into a ``RegExp`` value.

The template literal results in compilation of the regular expression at compile-time. On the other hand, the ``fromString`` results in runtime compilation of the regular expression.

> Ballerina regular expressions are based on the ECMAScript 2022 specification. It's important to note that Ballerina's regular expression support is based on a subset of ECMAScript. You can refer to the Ballerina regular expression specification to find the supported syntax. The specification can be found at [Regular expressions (preview).](https://ballerina.io/spec/lang/master/#section_10.1)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Ballerina regular expressions are based on the ECMAScript 2022 specification. It's important to note that Ballerina's regular expression support is based on a subset of ECMAScript. You can refer to the [Ballerina regular expression specification](https://ballerina.io/spec/lang/master/#section_10.1) to find the supported syntax.
```

> Ballerina's regular expression templates support interpolation, which allows you to dynamically insert values into a regular expression pattern. This is achieved by placing the interpolation token ${...} inside a ReAtom, which is a sub-syntax defined by the regular expression grammar.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Regular expression templates support interpolation, which allows you to dynamically insert values into a regular expression pattern. This is achieved by placing the interpolation token ${...} inside a ReAtom, which is a sub-syntax defined by the regular expression grammar.
```

IMO, we don' have to repeat "Ballerina's", applicable elsewhere too.

> Ballerina's regular expression templates support interpolation, which allows you to dynamically insert values into a regular expression pattern. This is achieved by placing the interpolation token ${...} inside a ReAtom, which is a sub-syntax defined by the regular expression grammar.

Author: My intention was to say there are limitation for interpolation.

### Unicode property Escape

Unicode general category templates can be used to match characters based on their Unicode properties. These templates can be used with the ``\p{...}`` or ``\P{...}`` escape sequences in a regular expression. Here ``\P`` represents the negation of a unicode template.

Below are some examples of unicode general category templates and their meanings,

- ``\p{L}`` matches any letter 
- ``\p{Ll}`` matches any lower case letter
- ``\p{N}`` matches any digit
- ``\P{P}`` matches any non-punctuation character

Ballerina regex also supports unicode script properties that can be used to match characters based on the language. Inorder to represent a unicode script we have to add ``sc=`` inside the curly braces.

Here are some property meanings,

- ``\p{sc=Arabic}`` matches any character in arabic.
- ``\p{sc=Latin}`` matches any character in latin.

### Non-capturing groups

Ballerina regexp supports non-capturing groups and flags to control the behavior of regular expression patterns. These allow you to group a set of regular expression constructs without capturing the matched text.

> non-capturing groups syntax :=  (?[flags][-][flags]:pattern) 

Author: @pcnfernando wdyt?

> non-capturing groups syntax :=  (?[flags][-][flags]:pattern) 

Reviewer: Agree with @MaryamZi. Let's refactor this

Ballerina supports four flags that can be used to modify the behavior of regular expression patterns:
- ``i`` (ignore case) flag: This flag makes the regular expression pattern case-insensitive, so that it matches both uppercase and lowercase letters.
- ``m`` (multiline) flag: This flag changes the behavior of the ``^`` and ``$`` anchors, so that they match the beginning and end of each line (as opposed to the beginning and end of the entire input string).
- ``s`` (dot all) flag: This flag changes the behavior of the ``.`` character, so that it matches any character including newline characters.
- ``x`` (comment) flag: This flag allows you to include comments in your regular expression pattern, using the ``#`` character. Comments are ignored by the regular expression engine.

```ballerina
// Non-capturing group allows you to apply multiple flags to the pattern inside the parentheses. 
// `i`, `m`, and `s` flags are applied to the pattern inside the group. 
// `i` flag makes the pattern case-insensitive.
// `m` flag makes `^` and `$` match the beginning and end of each line.
// `s` flag makes the . metacharacters match any character, including line terminators. 

> // This pattern will macth match "hello\nworld", "hello world", and "HELLO \n WORld"

Reviewer 3: Why is this a comment instead of a description?

Author: This way it is more readable.

Reviewer 3: We use comments in examples, but in these guides we've explained outside the code snippet, in detail. IMO, we need to maintain consistency.

string:RegExp nonCapturingGrpPattern = re `(?im-s:hello.+world)`;
```

### Using regexp values

The RegExp type in ballerina supports a set of langlib functions, such as ``split``, ``findAll``, ``findAllGroups``, and ``replaceAll``. Refer [RegExp API Docs](https://lib.ballerina.io/ballerina/lang.regexp/latest) for how to use these functions.

There are two constructs used to give the result of these langlib functions.
- ``Span``: Object type construct and it act as a holder for substrings.

> - ``Group``: Tuple of Span objects and the first member of the tuple is always the matching substring.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- ``Group``: tuple of ``Span`` objects and the first member of the tuple is always the matching substring.
```

 
In this way, the ``is`` operator in a condition causes the declared type to be narrowed.

## RegExp Type

Ballerina provides first-class support for regular expressions, which are represented by the RegExp built-in type defined in the lang.regexp module.

You can declare regular expressions in two ways.

Using regular expression template literal:
```ballerina
string:RegExp reg = re `abc+`;
```
In this approach, you can use the ``re`` keyword to define a regular expression pattern using a template literal. This allows for easy expression of regular expressions in a way that is similar to other languages.

Using the fromString method in the ``lang.regexp`` module

```ballerina
import lang.regexp;

> string quantiferStr = “{2,3}”;

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
string quantiferStr = "{2,3}";
```

string stringPattern = string `abc${quantiferStr}`;
regexp:RegExp reg = check regexp:fromString(stringPattern);
```
This approach allows for more dynamic construction of regular expressions, using string manipulation techniques to create a pattern that can be compiled into a RegExp value.

The template literal results in compilation of the regular expression at compile-time. On the other hand, the ``fromString`` results in runtime compilation of the regular expression.

Ballerina regular expressions are based on the ECMAScript 2022 specification. It's important to note that Ballerina's regular expression support is based on a subset of ECMAScript. You can refer to the Ballerina regular expression specification to find the supported syntax. The specification can be found at https://ballerina.io/spec/lang/master/#section_10.1.

Ballerina's regular expression templates support interpolation, which allows you to dynamically insert values into a regular expression pattern. This is achieved by placing the interpolation token ${...} inside a ReAtom, which is a sub-syntax defined by the regular expression grammar.

For example:
```ballerina
function foo(string name) {

>     string:RegExp pattern = re`[a-z]{3}|${name}`;

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    string:RegExp pattern = re `[a-z]{3}|${name}`;
```

x (comment) flag: This flag allows you to include comments in your regular expression pattern, using the # character. Comments are ignored by the regular expression engine.

```ballerina
// Non-capturing group allows you to apply multiple flags to the pattern inside the parentheses. 
// `i`, `m`, and `s` flags are applied to the pattern inside the group. 
// `i` flag makes the pattern case-insensitive.
// `m` flag makes `^` and `$` match the beginning and end of each line.
// `s` flag makes the . metacharacters match any character, including line terminators. 
// This pattern will macth match "hello\nworld", "hello world", and "HELLO \n WORld"

string:RegExp nonCapturingGrpPattern = re `(?im-s:hello.+world)`;
```

### Using regexp values

The RegExp type in ballerina supports a set of langlib functions, such as ``split``, ``findAll``, ``findAllGroups``, and ``replaceAll``. RegExp API Docs 

There are two constructs used to give the result of these langlib functions.
Span - Object type construct and it act as a holder for substrings.
Group - Tuple of Span objects and the first member of the tuple is always the matching substring.

```ballerina

> string[] names = re `,`.split(“Bob,Frank,Will,Jack); // [“Bob”, “Frank”, “Will”, “Jaclk”];

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
string[] names = re `,`.split(“Bob,Frank,Will,Jack); // [“Bob”, “Frank”, “Will”, “Jaclk”]
```
